Amazon EC2 Pricing

Programmatic access - Module 4 - Infra and AUto ???

Lam lai quiz Module 5

Note:
Amazone CloudWatch
Amazone EventBridge

infrastructure as code, or IaC

Amazon CloudFront -> use Edge locations - Amazon Global Edge Network -> AWS has a global edge network that provides quicker content access to users outside of standard Regions

 CloudFront is a content delivery network (CDN) 

AWS Global Accelerator and Amazon Route 53

Edge locations are devices in areas outside of Regions. These devices provide user access to frequently accessed data with low latency.  Edge locations, on the other hand, are part of the AWS content delivery network (CDN).

AWS CloudFormation - It highlights the ability to model and set up resources using code, automate provisioning, reduce errors, and help maintain environment consistency.

AWS Direct Connect

Classless Inter-Domain Routing (CIDR) biểu diễn và phân chia địa chỉ IP trong mạng máy tính => chỉ định mạng và số lượng IP bên trong mạng đó.

1 subnet MUST có 1 route table nếu muốn là public resource

khi tạo  một route table thì cũng cần phải attach internet gateway vào cái route table đó , destinantion là 0.0.0.0/0 là target là IG
Route table default sẽ có chọn cái gắn với VPC nào -> default sẽ có des là cái CIDR của VPC và target là local

Route 52 - DNS, có thể buy DNS được luôn chứ k chỉ translate IP
It connects user requests to infrastructure running in AWS, such as Amazon EC2 instances and load balancers. It also routes users to infrastructure outside of AWS. You can also transfer DNS records for existing domain names managed by other domain registrars. This makes it possible for you to manage all of your domain names within a single location/in single location

Amazon Route 53 -> Amazone  CloudFont (Edge region) -> Route 53 directs the user to the CloudFront edge location in the appropriate Region -> Region

The customer has a content router or firewall connecting their network to Direct Connect.

A subnet is a network segment within a Virtual Private Cloud (VPC) 

Global Accelerator is a network service that is designed to improve the availability and performance of applications for global users. It does this by providing static IP addresses, directing traffic over the AWS global network, and routing to optimal endpoints based on health, user location, and policies.

----------------------
Block storage -> EC2 -> Amazon EC2 instance store (unmanaged non-persistent) or Amazon Elastic Block Store (EBS)

Object are organize in flat structures called buckets -> best for large and infrequently changed -> Amazon S3

file storage uses a hierarchical file system that can be shared by applications. -> 
Amazone Elastic File System - EFS: A fully managed, scalable NFS file system for use with AWS Cloud services and on-premises resources.
Amazon FSx: A fully managed file storage services for popular file systems like Windows, Lustre, and NetApp ONTAP.

AWS Storage Gateway
A fully managed, hybrid-cloud storage service that provides on-premises access to virtually unlimited cloud storage.

AWS Elastic Disaster Recovery
A fully managed service that streamlines the recovery of your physical, virtual, and cloud-based servers into AWS.

fully managed
Customers are only responsible for data management, access controls, and proper service configuration

For managed storage services, AWS manages the underlying storage infrastructure, hardware redundancy, and volume replication. Customers are responsible for data backup strategies, encryption configuration, volume performance optimization, and capacity planning.

For unmanaged storage services, customers takes full responsibility for data management, backup/recovery, encryption, performance optimization, and durability. AWS only maintains the underlying physical hardware and network infrastructure.


As applications run, they will oftentimes need access to block-level storage. You can think of block-level storage as a place to store files. A file being a series of bytes that are stored in blocks on disk. When a file is updated, the whole series of blocks aren't all overwritten.

EBS is AZ level resource, EFS Regional level
EBS don't automatically scale, EFS automatically scale
EFS - Linux file system


EBS volumes can be easily migrated between Availability Zones using snapshots. The snapshots provide a simple way to move data across regions or create copies.

Since EBS volumes remain independent of EC2 instances. You can switch between storage types or adjust capacity without downtime.

EBS volumes are Region-specific and cannot be directly shared across Regions without additional configuration, and there would be latency impacts for cross-Region access.

Amazon EBS ensures data protection through automatic replication within the same Availability Zone. This provides the high availability and durability needed for financial applications with critical data.

Amazon Data Lifecycle Manager  schedule snapshot creation, set retention policies, manage lifecycles, and apply consistent backup policies across your organization.

EBS snapshots are point-in-time copies of EBS volumes that can be used for regular backups, creating duplicate volumes for testing, and enabling fast disaster recovery by restoring entire volumes from snapshots.

Snapshots of EBS volumes are stored redundantly in multiple Availability Zones using Amazon S3.  
----------------------------------------
Amazon S3 is managed service -> scaling handled by AWS

An object in Amazon S3 is the fundamental unit of data storage. When you upload a file to Amazon S3, it becomes an object and is stored durably across multiple facilities within your chosen Region.

Each Amazon S3 object is uniquely identified within a bucket by its key, which is essentially its file name. Objects also have properties like version ID, access control information, and user-defined metadata.

Buckets have a globally unique name across all of AWS

When creating a bucket, you specify its name and the Region where it will reside

Amazon S3 is commonly used for content distribution, hosting static websites, and delivering media files. It's also a popular choice for things like application data storage, archiving, data lakes, and compliance-driven data retention.

Amazon S3 bucket policies are resource-based policies that can only be attached to S3 buckets. An S3 bucket policy specifies which actions are allowed or denied on the bucket, in addition to every object in that bucket.

S3 buckets are accessible globally, regardless of the Region they're created in, assuming proper permissions.

With Amazon S3, consider the following six cost components when storing and managing customer data:
Storage pricing
Request and data retrieval pricing
Data transfer and transfer acceleration pricing
Data management and analytics pricing
Replication pricing
The price to process your data with Amazon S3 Object Lambda

Using Lambda to compress the data before storing in S3

----- EFS ----
Amazon EFS automatically replicates data across multiple Availability Zones in a region for high availability. This built-in redundancy protects against AZ failures and provides continuous access to your file systems.


EFS có sẵn default policy nhưng có thể customize nếu muốn for chuyển class

Compared to Amazon EFS, which focuses on the Network File System (NFS) compatibility, Amazon FSx supports multiple filesystem protocols, including Windows File Server, Lustre, OpenZFS, and NetAPP ONTAP.


Amazon FSx for Lustre -> high performance / ML/ Big Data
Amazon FSx for OpenZFS -> DA/ Content Management/ dev-test velocity
FSx for Windows File Server is a fully managed Windows file system. It supports SMB protocol, integrates with Active Directory, and provides the Windows compatibility needed for this scenario.


----------- Storage Gateway----------
Amazon S3 File Gateway: provides on-premises applications with access to virtually unlimited cloud storage through familiar file protocols. Files written to this server are automatically uploaded to Amazon S3 while maintaining local access to recently used data through intelligent caching. This means your applications can continue working with files as they always have while the actual data is securely stored in the AWS Cloud.

Volume Gateway operates in two main configurations:

Cached volume mode stores primary data in the cloud while frequently accessed data is cached locally for low-latency access.

Stored volume mode locally keeps your complete dataset while asynchronously backing it up to the cloud as EBS snapshots.


---------------------------
Elastic Disaster Recovery provides continuous block-level replication that maintains exact server replicas with minimal time between backup intervals, enabling rapid recovery when needed.


A service that minimizes downtime and data loss by providing fast, reliable recovery of on-premises and cloud-based applications using affordable storage, minimal compute, and point-in-time recovery
---------------
Amazon S3 excels at scalable object storage for web assets backups and more. 
Amazon EBS provides block level storage needed for EC2 instances and databases. 
Amazon EFS offers managed shared file systems from workloads that require rapid simultaneous access to files


------- DATABASE------
Fully managed AWS database services only require customers to be responsible for designing data structures and managing access controls.

Managed database services, AWS handles routine tasks like backups, patching, and hardware provisioning while customers are responsible for database configuration, query optimization, and performance tuning decisions.

Unmanaged databases, customers are responsible for installation, configuration, patching, maintenance tasks, database security, backups, high availability setup, and performance optimization. An example of an unmanaged database in AWS would be a database management system like MySQL installed directly on an Amazon Elastic Compute Cloud (Amazon EC2) instance.


-------------------  Relational Database
Transactional usually stored in RDBMS
Amazon RDS is a managed relational database service
To improve data resilience, Amazon RDS offers Multi-AZ deployment and automated backups

Amazon RDS performance insights provide real-time monitoring and analysis of database load, to help you identify and resolve performance bottlenecks quickly.
Amazon RDS enhances database security through multiple layers of protection, including VPC isolation as well as encryption at rest and in transit

In-memory caches -> cached content for RDS to optimize the speed, reduce bottleneck -> ElastiCache

Usẻ request -> EC2 -> check ElastiCache -> yes -> return
Usẻ request -> EC2 -> check ElastiCache -> no -> RDS -> stored in ElastiCache -> return

ElastiCache is a fully managed in-memory caching service  that was built to help reduce the complexity of administering in-memory caching systems. This means that you can continue to use the same Redis, Valkey, or Memcached tools and configurations to scale your workloads. It automatically detects and replaces failed nodes, which makes it ideal for applications that need consistent high performance.

ElastiCache streamlines the deployment and maintenance of in-memory caching environments, offering high availability for Redis, Valkey, and Memcached by automatically handling hardware provisioning, software patching, and monitoring.

ElastiCache provides high availability by constantly monitoring primary nodes for potential failures. When issues are detected, it maintains application availability while promoting a replica node to become the new primary without manual intervention. The entire recovery process typically finishes within minutes, which minimizes downtime and preserves operations during infrastructure disruptions.

At-rest encryption protects data while stored in disk storage and automated backups. In-transit encryption secures data traveling between clients and cache nodes by employing transport layer security, or TLS, for encrypted connections.

AMAZON AURORA Là một database engine đặc biệt do AWS phát triển
Aurora is a managed relational database designed to help reduce unnecessary I/O operations.
 Aurora replicates data across multiple Availability Zones for enhanced durability and fault tolerance, and features automated backups, encryption at rest, and continuous monitoring.

It also continuously backs up your database to Amazon Simple Storage Service (Amazon S3) to provide point-in-time recovery.


DynamoDB is a fully managed NoSQL database 
DynamoDB delivers 99.999% data availability by replicating data across three distinct facilities within each AWS Region. 
DynamoDB offers comprehensive encryption capabilities to protect information both at rest and in transit.

Amazon DynamoDB - Server-side encryption at rest is enabled on all DynamoDB table data using encryption keys stored in AWS Key Management Service (AWS KMS).

AWS DocumentDB (MongoDB): semistructured db JSON-like documents
AWS Neptune: Graph DB -> Some examples of practical use cases for Amazon Neptune are social network user connection mapping, fraud detection systems, and search and recommendation systems.

Neptune excels at storing and querying highly connected data using graph models. It supports both property graph and resource description framework, or RDF, models making it ideal for relationship mapping and pattern matching applications.

Neptune provides low-latency and high-throughput performance for both read and write operations, making it suitable for real-time applications working with connected data.

AWS Backup provides a single dashboard to manage backups across multiple AWS services and accounts.

With AWS Backup, you can define and manage backup policies at the organization level and implement them across all related AWS accounts and Regions automatically.

AWS Database Migration Service - A key benefit of AWS DMS is that the source database remains fully operational during migration, which minimizes downtime to applications.

----------------------------------

AWS AI/ML solutions
The AWS AI/ML stack is composed of the following three tiers of solutions:

AI services - pre-built models that are already trained to perform specific functions include Amazon Polly for text-to-speech generation, and Amazon Comprehend for text or sentiment analysis.

ML services - a more customized approach with Amazon SageMaker AI where you build, train, and deploy your own ML models with fully managed infrastructure

ML frameworks and infrastructure - a completely custom approach to building models using purpose-built chips that integrate with popular ML frameworks

Tier 1: AI Services
-Language services:
--- Amazon Comprehend: extract key insights from documents -> Use cases: Content classification, customer sentiment analysis, and compliance monitoring
--- Amazon Polly: convert text to speech -> Use cases: Virtual assistants, e-learning applications, and accessibility enhancements for visually impaired users
--- Amazon transcribe: speech to text -> Use Cases: Customer call transcription, automated subtitling, and metadata generation for media content.
--- Amazon Translate: text translation service -> Use cases: Document translation and multi-language application integrations

-Computer vision and search services:
--- Amazon Kendra: NLP search for answers -> Use cases: Intelligent search, chatbots, and application search integration
--- Amazon Rekognition: video analysis service identify objects, people, text, scenes, and activities within images and videos stored in Amazon Simple Storage Service (Amazon S3) -> Use cases: Content moderation, identity verification, media analysis, and home automation experiences
--- Amazon Textract: detects and extracts typed and handwritten text found in documents, forms, and even tables within documents -> Use cases: Financial, healthcare, and government form text extraction for quick processing

- Conversational AI and personalization services
--- Amazon Lex: natural language understanding (NLU) and automatic speech recognition (ASR) to create lifelike conversations -> Use cases: Virtual assistants, natural language search for FAQs, and automated application bots
--- Amazon Personalize: historical data to build intelligent applications with personalized recommendations for your customers. -> Use cases: Personalized streaming, product, and trending recommendations

Tier 2: ML Services
- SageMaker AI: fully managed service, you can build, train, and deploy your own ML models without worrying about infrastructure

Tier 3: ML frameworks and infrastructure
An ML framework is a software library or tool that provides experienced ML practitioners with pre-built, optimized components for building machine learning models.

AWS ML infrastructure, such as ML-optimized Amazon Elastic Compute Cloud (Amazon EC2) instances, Amazon EMR, and Amazon Elastic Container Service (Amazon ECS), can support these custom solutions.

------------------------
Generative AI is powered by extremely large ML models known as foundation models (FMs). FMs are pre-trained on vast collections of data. FMs can be adapted to perform multiple tasks.

Generative AI on AWS
AWS offers the following types of generative AI solutions:

Amazon SageMaker JumpStart—An ML hub with FMs and pre-built ML solutions deployable with a few clicks -> JumpStart = thư viện mẫu và mô hình ML/AI sẵn sàng để bạn tùy chỉnh và huấn luyện.

Amazon Bedrock—A fully managed service for adapting and deploying FMs from Amazon and other leading AI companies -> Bedrock = chọn và dùng sẵn mô hình GenAI, Không cần train, chỉ gọi API

Amazon Q—An interactive AI assistant that can be integrated with a company's information repositories -> Amazon Q = trợ lý AI cho doanh nghiệp và lập trình viên.


Data pipeline on AWS: automate the process of ingesting, cataloging, transforming, and delivering data from source to destination 

Storage
Amazon S3 -> Data lake: more flexible than Data Warehouse (Amazon Redshift), which is more structured

Ingestion:
- Amazon Kinesis Data Streams: real-time
- Amazon Data Firehose: near real-time -> batch process

Catalog:
AWS Glue with Data Catalog feature provides a centralized, scalable, and managed metadata repository that enhances data discovery.

Process - Clean and Transform:
AWS Glue: ETL with scheduling, code-free script 
Amazon EMR: perform large-scale, complex data processing using popular frameworks, suited for big data expertise, more control. It automatically handles infrastructure provisioning, cluster management, and scaling

Analysis:
- Amazon Athena - ideal for standard/ infrequent SQL queries: Athena is a fully managed serverless service. You can submit a SQL query to analyze data in relational, nonrelational, object, and custom data sources running on Amazon S3 or even hybrid environments. Oh yeah, it can analyze data outside of AWS, too. 
With Athena, you can run SQL queries to analyze data in relational, nonrelational, object, and custom data sources. This fully managed serverless service can access data hosted on Amazon S3, on premises, or even in multi-cloud environments.


- Amazon Redshift is the ideal choice. It’s better suited for complex queries on large datasets and frequent, high-performance analytical workloads. Amazon Redshift is a fully managed data warehouse service that can store petabytes of structured or semistructured data

Virtualization:
- Amazon QuickSight: interactive BI and dashboard/report -> (non) technical
- Amazon OpenSearch Service: real-time search, monitoring, and analysis of business and operational data -> monitoring, log analytics, observability, and website search.

------------------Security-------------
By default, all permission is denied
IAM - JSON policy
IAM users under groups will inherit the access from group
IAM roles - temporary access to AWS resource - no password and username. When someone assumes an IAM role, they abandon all previous permissions they had under a previous role and assume the permissions of the new role.

AWS IAM Identity Center - centralizes identity and access management across AWS accounts and applications -> SSO Federated identity management  
AWS Secrets Manager provides a secure way to manage, rotate, and retrieve database credentials, API keys, and other secrets throughout their lifecycle -> CyberArk Vault

AWS Systems Manager provides a centralized view of nodes across your organization’s accounts and Regions and multi-cloud and hybrid environments -> quickly access node information, such as ID and operating system details, and automate registry edits, user management, and security patching.
AWS Systems Manager (SSM) là một dịch vụ quản lý hạ tầng trong AWS, giúp bạn quan sát, quản lý và tự động hóa các tài nguyên trên AWS (EC2, S3, RDS, v.v.), cả on-premises lẫn hybrid cloud.

-----------------
AWS protection through infrastructure - DDoS
- Security groups: only allow in proper request traffic.
- ELB handles traffic first before handing it off, so your frontend server is not overwhelmed. Like security groups, it runs at the Region level.

Security groups make sure only traffic from authenticated users is allowed into the system, while an ELB distributes incoming traffic to prevent any single frontend server from being overwhelmed.

AWS protection through services
- AWS Shield Standard is designed to automatically protect AWS customers from the most common, frequently occurring types of DDoS attacks at no cost.
- AWS Shield Advanced is a paid service that provides detailed attack diagnostics and the ability to detect and mitigate sophisticated DDoS attacks. It also integrates with other services, such as Amazon CloudFront, Amazon Route 53, and ELB.
- AWS WAF is a web application firewall that monitors network requests that come into your web applications. When a request comes into AWS WAF, it checks the IP address against a web access control list (web ACL). If the request comes from a blocked IP address on the web ACL, AWS WAF denies access. Legitimate requests are allowed access.


------ Data protection-----TLS is an updated version of SSL
Encryption
AWS Key Management Services can be used across a wide range of AWS services, can use IAM policies to control the access 
AWS  Certificate Manager (ACM) - Venafi
Amazon Macie - monitor your sensitive data at rest to make sure it's safe. You can use Macie to assess your security posture, which is especially helpful for meeting compliance requirements. 

-------Detecting and Responding to Security Incidents------
Amazon Inspector: run automated security assessments 
-> list of vul and recommd, retrieve through API
Amazon GuardDuty: intelligent threat detection, AI/ML powered to identify threat
Amazon Detective: uncover the root cause after a threat has been detected, visualizations utilizing ML
AWS Security Hub: consolidate them all in one place.

-----------MONITORING-------------
CloudWatch (alarm, dashboard in near real time auto refresh) stored data in logs for AWS services and ON-PREMISE, reduce MTTR and improve TCO
SNS 

CloudWatch metrics

CloudWatch alarms

CloudWatch dashboards

CloudWatch logs

=> CloudWatch helps you visualize and analyze your resources, operate efficiently with automation, use an integrated view, proactively monitor, and gain insights. ======> Use case: It can be used to monitor and troubleshoot infrastructure.

MTTR (Mean Time to Recovery/Repair/Respond)
Ý nghĩa: Thời gian trung bình để khắc phục hoặc khôi phục một hệ thống sau khi gặp sự cố.

TCO (Total Cost of Ownership)
Ý nghĩa: Tổng chi phí sở hữu một hệ thống trong suốt vòng đời, bao gồm:
--------------AWS CloudTrail--------------Auditing--- store in S3---It logs every request made to AWS
Benefits: CloudTrail provides auditing, security monitoring, and operational troubleshooting. It also helps you prove compliance and improve your security posture.
-CloudTrail events capture details about actions performed within your AWS account, such as API calls, console actions, or other activities. Event history provides a viewable, searchable, downloadable, and immutable record of the past 90 days of management events in an AWS Region. There are no CloudTrail charges for viewing event history.
-CloudTrail monitors events and delivers those events as log files to your Amazon Simple Storage Service (Amazon S3) bucket. Because CloudTrail logs are securely stored, they can be used to prove compliance with regulations such as Payment Card Industry (PCI) and Healthcare Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA).
- CloudTrail Insights analyzes your normal patterns of API call volume and API error rates. CloudTrail Insights also generates Insights events when API call volumes and error rates deviate from these normal patterns. You can enable CloudTrail Insights in your trails or event data stores to detect anomalous behavior and unusual activity.

Tiêu chí	CloudWatch	CloudTrail
Chức năng chính	Monitoring (giám sát)	Auditing (kiểm tra, truy vết)
Dữ liệu theo dõi	Metrics, logs, events	API calls (who, what, when, where)
Mục tiêu	Vận hành & hiệu năng	Bảo mật & compliance

CloudTrail logs can be delivered to an S3 bucket or Amazon CloudWatch logs and are not limited to 90 days.
--------COMPLIANCE-------
AWS Artifact, you can gain access to compliance reports done by third parties who have validated a wide range of compliance standards. AWS Artifact is a service that provides no-cost, on-demand access to AWS security and compliance reports and select online agreements.
AWS Artifact consists of two types:
AWS Artifact agreements and AWS Artifact reports.
---Agreements = giấy tờ pháp lý mà bạn cần đồng ý với AWS, Đảm bảo bạn tuân thủ các quy định khi sử dụng AWS cho dữ liệu nhạy cảm.
---Reports = tài liệu chứng minh AWS đã được kiểm toán & đạt chuẩn, Giúp bạn chứng minh hệ thống chạy trên AWS tuân thủ chuẩn bảo mật/quản lý quốc tế. AWS Artifact Reports provide compliance reports from third-party auditors


AWS Compliance Center. It will show you compliance-enabling services in one place. And you can also use resources like the AWS Risk and Security whitepaper which contains a lot of awesome information that you can learn from.

-------AWS Config--------
Benefits: AWS Config helps evaluate configurations against a desired state, manage resource configuration changes, and simplify troubleshooting and remediation.

Use cases: It can be used to continually audit security monitoring and analysis and to streamline operational troubleshooting and change management.
AWS Config

-Mục đích: Theo dõi cấu hình tài nguyên AWS và kiểm tra tuân thủ theo rule.
-Chức năng chính:
---Ghi lại lịch sử thay đổi cấu hình (ai thay đổi, thay đổi gì).
---Kiểm tra tài nguyên có tuân thủ rule hay không (ví dụ: tất cả S3 bucket phải bật encryption).
---Cho phép bạn remediate (tự động sửa) nếu vi phạm rule.

-Ví dụ: Bạn có một EC2 mà không gắn trong VPC chuẩn → AWS Config báo là non-compliant.

👉 AWS Config = camera theo dõi cấu hình tài nguyên & compliance theo rule.
-----AWS Audit Manager----

Audit Manager is a service that continually audits your AWS usage to simplify risk and compliance assessment. It helps collect evidence and manage audit data.

Benefits: Audit Manager saves time with automated evidence collection, streamlines collaboration across teams, and helps ensure integrity of audits with read-only permissions.

Use case: It can be used to automate evidence collection, continually audit to assess compliance, and deploy internal risk assessments.

-Mục đích: Tự động thu thập chứng cứ để giúp bạn chuẩn bị audit theo chuẩn (ISO, SOC, PCI DSS, HIPAA…).

-Chức năng chính:
---Tự động thu thập evidence từ nhiều dịch vụ AWS.
---Cung cấp framework có sẵn (SOC 2, ISO 27001, PCI DSS, HIPAA, GDPR…).
---Xuất báo cáo audit để gửi cho auditor hoặc đối tác.

-Ví dụ: Bạn cần chứng minh hệ thống đạt chuẩn SOC 2 → Audit Manager tự động gom log, config, evidence để bạn tạo báo cáo.

👉 AWS Audit Manager = trợ lý audit, gom chứng cứ & sinh báo cáo compliance.
--------AWS Organizations------------AWS service that helps consolidate and manage multiple AWS accounts.
SCP - Service Control Policy
Benefits: Organizations provides several benefits like quickly scaling your environment by programmatically creating new AWS accounts for resources and teams. It also helps by simplifying permission management through SCPs and managing and optimizing costs across your AWS accounts and resources.

Use cases: It can be used for automating AWS account creation, providing tools and access for your security teams, controlling user access to designated services, and sharing common resources across accounts.

----
The management account is the central AWS account that creates and manages the organization. It's responsible for overall control and governance.
---
An organizational unit (OU) is a logical grouping of accounts in an AWS Organization. OUs can contain member accounts or nested OUs.
---
An SCP is a policy that lets you place restrictions on the AWS services, resources, and individual API actions that users and roles in each account can access. SCPs can be applied to either OUs or individual member accounts.
---
If you have a member account that has unique requirements that do not overlap with those of an organizational unit, you can add them to the organization. They do not have to be placed under an OU. This account can still take advantage of benefits such as consolidated billing.

*********IAM vs Organizations**********

IAM = quản lý người và quyền trong 1 account.

Organizations = quản lý nhiều account và chính sách cấp cao.

In AWS Organizations, you can apply SCPs to the organization root, an individual member account, or an OU. An SCP affects all IAM users, groups, and roles within an account, including the AWS account root user.

You can apply IAM policies to IAM users, groups, or roles. You cannot apply an IAM policy to the AWS account root user.

IAM policy cấp quyền chi tiết trong 1 account.

SCP giới hạn quyền tối đa trên nhiều account (giống như “khung luật” mà IAM phải nằm trong đó).
***************

--------------Governance in the AWS Cloud--------------
 three AWS services that can help govern and enforce services and accounts to meet your company's requirements:
-AWS Control Tower
Là một dịch vụ quản trị đa tài khoản (multi-account governance service).
Nó giúp bạn thiết lập và quản lý môi trường AWS nhiều tài khoản một cách chuẩn hóa, an toàn và tuân thủ ngay từ đầu.
Bạn có thể hình dung nó như “bảng điều khiển trung tâm” để quản lý toàn bộ AWS Organization.
AWS Control Tower is a service you can use to enforce and manage governance rules for security, operations, and compliance at scale across all your organizations and accounts in the AWS Cloud.

uses preconfigured controls, which can help you to quickly set up multi-account environments, automation with built-in governance, and integration of third-party software at scale.

Use cases: Use AWS Control Tower to quickly deploy applications and provision compliant AWS accounts.
 AWS Control Tower features:
---dashboard: provides continuous oversight to see provisioned accounts across your enterprise. AWS Control Tower also has controls for policy enforcement and can help detect noncompliant resources 
    -> Theo dõi compliance status của tất cả tài khoản trong tổ chức từ một dashboard.

---Account Factory is a configurable account template that standardizes the provisioning of new accounts 
    -> Tự động hóa việc tạo tài khoản mới theo mẫu chuẩn (có sẵn role, network, log, security baseline).
---Controls, sometimes called guardrails, are high-level rules that provide governance for your overall AWS environment.
  Tập hợp chính sách (SCP, AWS Config rules) để đảm bảo best practices & compliance. Có 2 loại:
------------Preventive guardrails: ngăn hành vi không cho phép (ví dụ: cấm dùng region ngoài Asia).
------------Detective guardrails: phát hiện vi phạm (ví dụ: phát hiện S3 bucket không mã hóa).
---Landing zone is a well-architected multi-account environment that's based on security and compliance best practices. It's the enterprise-wide container that holds all of the organizational units (OUs), accounts, users, and resources you want to regulate for compliance.
Landing zone = một môi trường AWS nhiều tài khoản, được dựng sẵn theo best practices để doanh nghiệp dễ quản lý bảo mật, compliance, và tổ chức tài nguyên.
-AWS Service Catalog
AWS Service Catalog = dịch vụ giúp doanh nghiệp tạo một “kho sản phẩm AWS chuẩn hóa” để user triển khai nhanh, đúng chuẩn, an toàn và dễ quản lý.
-AWS License Manager
----------AWS Health Dashboard-------------
-----------AWS Trusted Advisor-------------
Automated Adviors, can be used in your AWS account that will evaluate your resources against five categories of checks.
Fault Tolerance -> back up, load balancer, 

Benefits: Trusted Advisor helps you align with AWS best practices, prioritize recommendations, and optimize your AWS resources at scale.

Use cases: It can be used to optimize cost, efficiency, security, improve performance, and track service limits.
------------Identity Access Management Access Analyzer------------
IAM Access Analyzer 
Benefits: IAM Access Analyzer provides benefits like refining permissions, validating IAM policies, helping you meet your least privilege goals, and automating IAM policy reviews.

Use cases: It can be used to set fine-grained permissions, verify who can access what, remediate unused access, and refine and remove broad access.

------Pricing and Support-------
AWS pricing, AWS support, and cost optimization
----AWS Billing Dashboard, AWS Budgets, and AWS Cost Explorer---
-Pay as you go
-Save when you commit (1 or 3 years)
-Pay less by using more: volumed base discount

Driving factors of cost:
- Compute: EC2, Lambda, ECS
- Storage: S3, EBS
- Outbound data transfer
----AWS Billing Dashboard: for multiple-account environment-----
showing current charges, usage, forecasts, and detailed breakdowns. It also provides tools to manage payments, view invoices, set budgets, and consolidate billing.

Use cases:
Use helpful visualizations and billing reports of monthly AWS spend.
Set up and manage payment methods.

----AWS Cost Explorer: review cost and usage overtime
Use cases:
Analyze historical spending trends to identify cost-saving opportunities.
Forecast future AWS costs based on current usage patterns to budget effectively.
-----AWS Pricing Calculator-------
Use cases:
Estimate potential costs before deployment.
Compare costs of different AWS services and configurations.


Nếu bạn chỉ có 1 tài khoản AWS → dùng Billing and Cost Management Dashboard là đủ.
Nếu bạn có nhiều tài khoản AWS (multi-account environment) và muốn quản lý & consolidate billing tập trung → phải dùng AWS Organizations với Consolidated Billing.
----AWS Support plans and other resources, including the AWS Marketplace and AWS Partner Network-----
Basic Support -> Developer Suport -> Business Support -> Enterprise On-Ramp Support -> Enterprise Support


A technical account manager (TAM) is included with the Enterprise On-Ramp and Enterprise Support plans. The TAM serves as your primary AWS contact, offering expert guidance on using AWS services, optimizing architectures, managing costs, and connecting you with AWS programs and experts. For example, if you're building an app using multiple AWS services, your TAM can advise on the best integration approach.


The APN helps AWS Partners build, market, and sell solutions based in AWS by providing them with technical, marketing, and go-to-market support.

-------------
-Assess phase: you build the business case for the migration and assess your readiness. One of the services used in this phase is the Migration Evaluator. 
---Migration Evaluator: estimate the cost of your relocation, analyzes your current IT setup and provides detailed cost estimates for moving to AWS, Businesses can use this to make data-driven decisions about their cloud migration strategy and justify the investment to stakeholders.
++++Benefits: The benefits include removing the guesswork when migrating. It provides visibility into multiple cost-effective cloud migration scenarios. It also gives insights on reusing existing software licensing, which can further reduce costs.
+++++Use cases: You can use Migration Evaluator to conduct broad-based discovery, take a snapshot of your current on-premises footprint to fine-tune licensing, view server dependencies, and gain visibility into multiple migration scenarios. You can also use it to estimate and reduce your cloud costs.


-Mobilize phase: you prepare the organization and mobilize the resources needed for the migration. Two services you might use in this phase are AWS Application Discovery Service and the AWS Migration Hub.
---AWS Application Discovery Service -> migration plan: migration detective help to plan your move to AWS more effectively by performing the automatic discovery of applications and providing detailed reports on your IT landscape.
---AWS Migration Hub:your command center for the entire moving process, unified view of all tasks and progress tracking, keep your migration efforts organized and ensure nothing falls through the cracks. FREE
+++++Benefits: With the Migration Hub, you have one location to go for your migration and, expert guidance in the form of prescriptive journey templates. Another benefit is cost savings because there is no charge to use Migration Hub.
+++++Use cases: You can use Migration Hub for migration assessment and planning and migration completion and collaboration with teams. You can also use it for modernization efforts like fast-tracking application refactoring.


-Migrate and Modernize: use your strategy, plan, and the best practices to migrate and modernize. Tools to support you include AWS Application Migration Service and AWS Database Migration Service (AWS DMS). If you are transferring data, you might use AWS DataSync, AWS Transfer Family, and the AWS Snow Family.
---AWS Application Migration Service:pack up your applications and smoothly transport them to AWS, can even make small adjustments to ensure everything works in its new cloud home
Application Migration Service is a tool to migrate and improve on-premises and cloud-based applications. It helps the agency simplify, expedite, and reduce the cost of migrating and modernizing applications.

---AWS Database Migration Service: It supports homogenous and heterogenous migrations, could be relational databases, data warehouses, NoSQL databases, and even analytics workloads.
---AWS Schema Conversion Tool:simplify database migrations by automating schema analysis, recommendations, and conversion at scale.
---AWS DataSync: the majority of data migration workloads, automating and accelerating data transfer. DataSync manages data movement workloads with bandwidth throttling, migration SCHEDULING, task filtering, and task REPORTING. It also provides rapid data replication.
AWS storage services like Amazon S3, Amazon Elastic File System (Amazon EFS), and Amazon FSx for Windows File Server.
---AWS Transfer Family - FTPS/SFTP:  It helps you transfer files directly into and out of AWS storage services like Amazon S3 and Amazon EFS.
---AWS Snowball Edge Storage Optimized devices:
------AWS Cloud Adoption Framework (CAF)----------
Business: create a strong business case for cloud adoption and prioritize cloud adoption initiatives
People: evaluate organizational structures and roles, assess new skill and process requirements, and identify gaps. This helps prioritize training, staffing, and organizational changes.
The People perspective supports development of an organization-wide change management strategy for successful cloud adoption.
Governance:  understand how to update the staff skills and processes necessary to maintain business governance in the cloud
Platform: Use a variety of architectural models to understand and communicate the structure of IT systems and their relationships. Describe the architecture of the target state environment in detail.
Security: objectives for visibility, auditability, control, and agility.
Operations

AWS CAF provides AWS experience and best practices to companies preparing to migrate to the AWS Cloud. The framework also provides tools to help accelerate the migration journey, organize resources, and align management during the transition.

-----seven migration strategies------
Rehost: Lift and shift
Relocate: app chay tren VM roi ma chuyuen len cloud chay tiep
Replatform: Lift, tinker and shift -> optimizing nhung  without changing the core architecture of the application.
Refactor: writing new code, re-architecting, involves reimagining how an application is architected and developed by using features built for the cloud
Repurchase (drop and shop): change software vendor, Repurchasing involves moving from a traditional license to a software-as-a-service (SaaS) model
Retain: stays where it lays
Retiring involves removing an application that is no longer used or that can be turned off.



---------------------------
X-Ray is a powerful tracing, debugging, and performance analysis tool that helps developers visualize application behavior.

AWS AppSync is a fully managed GraphQL service. With AWS AppSync, developers can create a single GraphQL API that can securely access, manipulate, and combine data from multiple data sources. This helps developers connect frontend applications with backend data.

Amplify helps you streamline the process of developing, deploying, and managing secure and scalable full-stack applications on AWS. With Amplify, developers can quickly add features, like authentication, APIs, storage, and hosting, with minimal infrastructure management. => Amplify là nền tảng giúp bạn build nhanh ứng dụng web/mobile với backend AWS (auth, API, storage, hosting) mà không cần cấu hình thủ công.


Amazon AppStream 2.0 → Stream ứng dụng AppStream 2.0 delivers desktop applications to users through web browsers, enabling secure SaaS application access for employees.

Amazon WorkSpaces → Stream cả desktop ảo (VDI). WorkSpaces provides a complete persistent desktop experience for remote workers.


AWS Well-Architected Tool (AWS WA Tool) is a free service that helps assess and improve cloud workloads based on the six key pillars: Operational Excellence, Security, Reliability, Performance Efficiency, Cost Optimization, and Sustainability.

The AWS WA Tool is ideal for architects, engineers, and compliance teams, and it promotes consistent, actionable, and well-documented architecture reviews.
